---
layout: post
title: A More Realistic Expectation for BYU Football Fans
published: False
---
I think it is fair to say that BYU's football season this year has been a big disappointment to BYU fans.  Perhaps the most disappointed is Ty Detmer, who got fired over it, even though the problems ran much deeper than Detmer.

There's a speech I have in my mind that I think is exactly the speech Kilani Sitake would like to give to BYU fans everywhere.  He will never give this speech, I expect, because it would probably be unbecoming of a head coach to do so.

So I'm going to do it for him.  Here goes:

> Dear fans of BYU football everywhere:
>
> On behalf of the athletes, coaches, and administrative staff of the BYU football team, I wish to express appreciation for your continued and enduring loyalty and devotion to the football team and program at BYU.  Most of you are so loyal that BYU football games are the only college football games you ever see.  Most of you are so loyal that any time a call goes against BYU you blame the officials for being biased even if they are making accurate and fair calls.  Your blind faith and following is flattering and we are grateful.
>
> In order to better preserve the relationship between our organization and you, our devoted fans, I wish to give you some insight into the increasing challenges we have in running a successful organization.  By giving you this insight I hope to be able to set reasonable expectations for you, as a foundation for a brighter future.
>
> To start off, let's ask ourselves this question:  Why does BYU have a football team?
>
> For most schools, there are a number of likely reasons.  One would be to help fund the school via the income a football program brings.  Another reason would be to attract students, either directly (the premise being that students prefer a school with a football team to cheer for) or indirectly (the premise being that students like the idea of attending a school where famous football players played their college ball).  Yet another reason would be to help many young athletes get a college education, individuals who otherwise might not have the opportunity to get such an education.
>
> For BYU these are important but secondary reasons.  As the flagship institution of higher education for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, the BYU football team can act as an ambassador for the church.  When we are playing on a game that is televised, commentators might mention the fact that many of the players are already married, or have served LDS missions.  Or they might comment on the type of young men that they are, or the stringent BYU honor code by which we expect every student to abide.
>
> However, in order for our team to be this type of ambassador for the church, the players must actually be upstanding young men that will carry that responsibility honorably.  A big part of that is abiding by the honor code.  This is something that is not easy to do, even for young men who believe in it and want to live it.  This is made even harder with the increased temptations facing young men who are members of a college football team.
>
> This has long been the case, of course.  But in a day when everyone around you is carrying an internet-connected photo, audio, and video capture device, the risk of getting caught when a mistake is made is high.  Most of the top players in the country don't see any reason to hold themselves to such a high moral standard, and they have plenty of offers to play at other schools where such expectations don't exist.
>
> This puts our program in a bit of a situation.  Either we decide to lower our moral standards in order to be more attractive to top athletes, or we live with the diminished talent pool available to us that is composed of the best football athletes who also want to abide by the honor code.
>
> Of course, we are not going to do away with the honor code, nor are we going to turn a blind eye to players who violate the code.  To do so would diminish a primary goal of the team, which is to act as a good ambassador for the LDS church.  So this leaves us only one alternative:  Work to attract the best athletes who will abide by the code, and live with the fact that many top athletes will be eliminated from consideration on this basis.
>
> We as a coaching and administrative staff work hard to attract all of the best athletes in this talent pool.  Doing this of course requires attracting the best coaches and administrators we can.  Many of you may not be aware of this, but this poses another challenge for us, which is that the financial limitations both for the program and for individual compensation requires us to operate on budgets that are below, sometimes far below, those of many of the schools with which we compete.  For example, this year many of the head coaches at top football programs across the country have contracts worth $5 million per year or more.  Our budgets do not allow compensation that is anywhere near this level.  Thus, many of our coaches and administrators could quite possibly make quite a bit more money elsewhere.  Again, our hiring pool is limited not only by those who are committed to living by and enforcing our standards, but who also want to be here badly enough that they will work for less money than they could otherwise earn.
>
> Now, when these coaches and administrators, hired from a limited pool I just described, head out to recruit athletes from the limited pool I previously described, finally we have to face the fact that many of these young men will be LDS and therefore will be desirous to serve LDS missions.  And of course we want to support and even encourage this, as it is something we believe in for young men who will eventually play for us.  However, this further complicates the already difficult process of building a team.  Many of the young men we recruit this year will not even show up for fall training until 2020 at the earliest.
>
> Establishing a strong football program is challenging to do.  Doing it with the constraints I previously described is even more challenging.  Maintaining a high level of execution adds to the challenge.  When many of the players you recruit this year won't even show up for another two years, that adds another level of complexity.
>
> To paint the picture starkly, this year due to immense pressure from you, the fans, I was compelled to dismiss my offensive coordinator, Ty Detmer, who so many of you were eagerly hoping I'd be able to hire just two years ago.  I'm trying to point out this fact:  Many of the people he recruited are not even home from their missions yet.  In the best of circumstances, you wouldn't expect a full program turnaround in less than three years.  Since many of our young men serve missions before or during their playing time, it would only make sense to extend that expectation to five years.  Yet after only two we find ourselves relieving our offensive coordinator of his duties, when many of the players we've recruited so far haven't even started playing for us yet.
>
> It is right for fans to hope for greatness from the team you love, to look forward to exciting and competitive games, winning seasons, and bowl game berths, and to feel disappointment when we have a bad season.  However, given the constraints under which we must operate and the competition we face, the expectations many of you have for BYU football are completely unrealistic.  Many of you have preseason expectations that include invitations to New Year's Six bowl games, if not invitations to the College Football Playoff.  It isn't enough for you to even get a bowl game invite.  To meet your expectations as an independent would require at worst one loss, more likely an undefeated season, against quality competition all year.  Considering everything I've described here, these expectations are not realistic for our team, and only serve to increase your dissatisfaction as we fail to measure up to the standards of teams like Clemson, Alabama, and Oklahoma, or even others like LSU, Stanford, or Michigan.
>
> Of course, a 4-9 season is not acceptable either.  I suggest a more reasonable expectation from you.  An 8-win season is a strong goal considering the competition we face, and gives a strong likelihood of an invitation to a quality bowl game.  Give us a few years to turn our program around and make your expectations more reasonable.  We will continue to do everything we can to make our football program one of high quality and standards and exceed your expectations.
